Look, here's the code for my Sidebar component,
for this yellow component that I have on the side of the app.
What I have in this component is I have three child components.
I have the FilterInput component, which
renders the filter input.
I have the NotesList component, which renders the notes list.
And I have the NoteControls component,
which renders a bunch of buttons.
And another thing this component has
is a single bit of state called filter.
And so the single bit of state called filter,
it is updated every time I'm typing into the filter input.
And it controls both the FilterInput and the NotesList.
So every time I'm typing into the FilterInput,
my FilterInput re-renders and my NotesList re-renders.
So OK, now one thing React 18 introduces
is non-urgent updates.
And to start applying these optimizations,
I needed to tune my mental model a bit.
I needed to learn to look at the app
and try to figure out, OK, which of these components
need to be updated immediately, urgently, synchronously?
And which of these components could
be updated non-urgently, like not blocking
the page with a delay?
And so if I look at this app, I would
realize that in this case, this state controls two components.
It controls the FilterInput, and it controls the NotesList.
But what actually happens here is the FilterInput component
is the component that needs to update immediately.
Every time I'm typing into the editor, into the input,
I need the input to update immediately,
because otherwise the app would feel laggy.
But the NotesList thing, it doesn't
need to update right away.
It could lag.
I, as a user, am perfectly OK with the filter list
lagging a second after my input if the app stays responsive.
I'm good with that.
And so the way we would typically implement this optimization
is, indeed, with debouncing and throttling,
you would wrap your input event with, like,
lodash.debounce or lodash.throttle,
and you would make sure it runs less frequently.
But what React allows you to do is
React gives you another primitive
for implementing a better optimization, an optimization
that doesn't have drawbacks of debouncing and throttling.
And this primitive is non-urgent updates.
So to use non-urgent updates, I need to do two things.
The first thing is, I need to take my single state,
and I need to split it into two states.
One of these states would be urgent,
and the other of these states would be non-urgent.
So I'd call the first state filterInput.
And I'd call the second state, oh, sorry,
yeah, setFilterInput.
All right, this is going to be slow.
Ooh, I'm bad with keyboards.
The second state would be called filterValue
and setFilterValue.
And now the filterInput would be
passed into the FilterInput component,
and the filterValue will be passed
into the NotesList component.
And I would also call both setState hooks whenever I am,
wrong line, whenever I detect input updates.
And one more thing, let's upgrade to React 18,
if only it was so easy.
So now we have the app running in the React 18 mode.
And if I tried typing into the filter input,
it would still feel slow.
Like I try typing, and look, it's lagging.
The spinner still lags.
And if I tried to type a bunch of letters,
it would get slow and stuff.
So we didn't do anything yet.
We just duplicated the state, and we made our app worse.
But what I can do now is I could take the second setState call,
and I could wrap it with a function called startTransition.
And by doing this, I would tell React that, look,
this setState call is not urgent.
So what you could do, React, you could take the setState call,
and you could run it without blocking the page.
And let's see how this works.
So I apply this.
Oh, no, hold on.
I need the startTransition function from somewhere, right?
So I could import it straight from React.
This would work.
Or I could use the hook useTransition,
which has one minor benefit.
It also lets you to learn when the component is transitioning.
isPending, startTransition equals useTransition.
So startTransition is a function
that you wrap your state updates into.
And isPending is a thing that you could tune the app
to show that the app is transitioning,
that there's something that's lagging behind,
like me setting opacity here.
And so let's see how this works now.
So pay attention to the spinner.
I'm typing, and the spinner doesn't lag.
The whole list of components re-renders,
I could even open DevTools to show you.
and this takes a second.
Like, it lags by a second.
It takes a second for it to render.
But the spinner does not lag.
I can type a bunch of letters, and this would still
be responsive.
This would update immediately.
I can remove everything.
Look, I'm typing it.
And it's almost like magic.
It's so super cool.